Shell Scripting for DevOps Engineers
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                             **LECTURE 04**
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
* **1. Conditional Statements**
CS allow you to execute specific blocks of code based on whether the condition is true/false
CS are used to execute commands based on a condition
To implement CS we will use "if-elif-else"

  - **Types of CS;**
1. **if statement**: Executes a block of code if a condition is true
2. **if-else statement:** Executes one block of code if the condition is true, and another block of code if its false
3. **if-elif-else statement:** Checks multiple conditions and executes the corresponding block of code

```bash
Syntax:
if [ condition ]; then
	# if condition is true then print the message
elif [ condition ]; then
	# if condition is true then print the message
else
	# print this message
```
if-else SCRIPT
Examples-1: 
- Shell Script to check whether a file is available or not 

```bash
#! /bin/bash
echo "enter File Name"
read filename

if [ -e "$filename" ]; then 
	echo "the $filename" is available "
else
	echo "the $filename" is not available"
fi

```
Examples-2:
- Write a shell file whether life year or not

```bash
#! /bin/bash
echo "Enter a Year:"
read year
if (( (year % 4 == 0 && year % 100 != 0) || year % 400 ==0 )); then 
	echo "$year is leap year"
else 
	echo "$year is not a leap year"
fi
```

Examples-3: 
* if-elif-else using on shell secripting 
```bash
#! /bin/bash
echo "Enter a number (1-7) for the day of a week"
read day

if ["$day" -eq 1 ]; then
	echo "Sunday"
elif ["$day" -eq 2]; then
	echo "Monday"
elif ["$day" -eq 3]; then
	echo "Tuesday"
elif ["$day" -eq 4]; then
	echo "Wednesday"
elif ["$day" -eq 5]; then
	echo "Thursday"
elif ["$day" -eq 6]; then
	echo "Friday"
elif ["$day" -eq 7]; then
	echo "Sunday"
else
	echo "invalidate input is $day please enter number is (1-7)"
fi
```

* **1. Command Line Arguments**
CLA are inputs passed to script when it is being executed
CLA allows us to make our scripts dynamic and reusable
CLA can be accessed using special vairables

* **How to use CLA?**
    - $0 - represents the name of the script
    - Ex: echo $0 #Print the script name

    - $1, $2, $3, $4,..... - These numbers represent the first, second, third, fourth, etc. CLA passed to script
    - $1 - Prints the first argument
    - $2 - Prints the second argument
    - $3 - Prints the third argument

    - $# - prints total number of arguments - it is going to exclude the script name

    - $@ - this variable holds all the CLA passed to the script, treating each argument as a separate quoted string

    - $* - but it treats all arguments as a single string with spaces separating them

`$@ Vs $*`
* $@ treats each argument as a separate entity, keeping them distinct even if there are spaces in the arguments
* $* treats all arguments as a single string, with spaces b/w them, which can lead to loss of distinction if arguments contains spaces
* examples-1
```bash
#! /bin/bash

echo "Script name: $0"
echo "Frist argument: $1"
echo "Second argument: $2"
echo "third argument: $3 "
echo "All arguments as \$@: $@"
echo "Number of arguments: $# "
echo "All arguments as \$*: $*"

```

**3. Functions**
Functions are reusable blocks of code that performs a specific task.
They help in organizing the code, avoiding the repetition, and making script modular

Syntax:
function_name () {
	#CodeToExecute
}

Calling a function:
function_name

```bash

#!/bin/bash
great () {
	echo "Hello, $1 Welcome to shell scripting"

}
# Calling the functions 

great "Kastro"


```

Summary of topics
Conditional Statements - Number checker
Command Line Arguments - Greet user using command line argument
Functions - Calulator with functions - define the functions for addition, subtraction and multiplication

Assignment
1. Conditional Statements
Write a script that:
Takes a number as input.
Checks if the number is even or odd.
Displays the result.

1. Command Line Arguments
Write a script that:
Takes three numbers as command line arguments.
Displays the largest number among them.

1. Functions
Write a script that:
Defines a function to calculate the factorial of a number.
Takes a number as input and displays its factorial.



